
Both Raftopoulos (2014) and Ferrara (2012) explicitly advise to start a gamification project by determining the goals for the system. But what those goals are&mdash;or at least what they should be&mdash;is not an obvious question. To begin with, how can you properly balance the goals of the organization and the goals of the users?

Often, the goals of the organization obscure the goals of the user, such as in the gamification of a university course, when “Our goal with gamification was to improve lecture attendance, content understanding, problem solving skills and general engagement. [These were] measured using course marks, lecturer evaluations, lecture attendance, and a questionnaire” (O’Donovan *et al.* 2013).  While improved marks are evidence that the users of the system, the students, benefitted from it, the inclusion of “lecturer evaluations” as an indicator of success implies that overall the goals were organization-centric.

Or the goals of the organization may simply ignore the goals of the user. “The language used by vendors selling gamification solutions imply that it is something performed on employees by management” in order to improve employee performance (Raftopoulos 2014), as opposed to something that assists, or benefits employees.  More so “gamification too often invokes organization-centered design, treating users as zombies: senseless mechanisms urged onwards by a desire for extrinsic rewards. Gamification still often fails to acknowledge the user’s context and innate psychological needs” (Conway 2014).

While the analogy to mindless zombies might be hyperbole, at least one example of gamification did treat its users as something like non-sentient beings. In order to gather data on the deployment of Near-Field Communication tags, researchers released what was ostensibly a game, but what it could also be argued was an application, with a heavy layer of gamification that obscured its objective and the core process. The researchers themselves described their project as using “gamification”, and reported that “most users are unaware of the game's purpose as a research project”.  In describing the process of deploying their application, they wrote that they “chose a neutral name for our game that did not disclose its nature as a research project, but did rather seem like a game of an independent development studio” (Kranz 2013).  The intentional obfuscation of the true purpose of an application is, if nothing else, putting the goals of the organization well ahead of those of the user.

Conversely, the goals of the user might be made superior to those of the organization. Some have recommended that “…meaningful gamification puts the needs and goals of the users over the needs of the organization”.  And while we are assured that “if users have a positive and meaningful game-based experience that is well-connected to the underlying non-game setting, then the organization will benefit in the long term” (Nicholson 2012), much like with the student's goals in the example above, merely ensuring that the organization benefits is not the same as ensuring that the organizational goals are serviced.

This confusion and conflict is a consequence of trying to define goals for a gamified application as opposed to a game application.

Designers of games don't necessarily have an easy task in defining project goals, but it is at least a straight-forward one, since “the fundamental role of the game designer is to be the ‘advocate of the player’ and the designer must look at the game world that is being created through the eyes of the player and focus completely on the player experience without being distracted by the other concerns of production”. In contrast, “a gamification designer is often the advocate of management… and the role of the player or worker is fundamentally subordinate in the game that is being developed. The engagement and experience of the player in a gamified enterprise application is typically a means to an end…, rather than the end in itself…” (Raftopoulos 2014).

One way proposed to overcome the confusion and possible conflict over the goals of a gamification project is to include users in the process of defining the project goals, and also by framing those objectives within a larger definition of project values&mdash;which users also participate in defining (Raftopoulos 2014).



(cf. Deterding 2012, Ferrara 2012, Nicholson 2012, Conway 2014, Raftopoulos 2014)


* Conway, Steven. 2014. “Zombification?: Gamification, Motivation, and the User.” *Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds* 6 (2): 129–41. doi:10.1386/jgvw.6.2.129_1. ._.
Deterding, Sebastian. 2012. “Gamification: Designing for Motivation.” Interactions 19 (4): 14–17. doi:10.1145/2212877.2212883.

* Ferrara, John. 2012. *Playful Design: Creating Game Experiences in Everyday Interfaces*. 1st ed. Brooklyn, New York: Rosenfeld Media.
* Kranz, Matthias, Lukas Murmann, and Florian Michahelles. 2013. “Research in the Large: Challenges for Large-Scale Mobile Application Research- A Case Study about NFC Adoption Using Gamification via an App Store.” *International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction* 5 (1): 45–61. doi:10.4018/jmhci.2013010103.
* Nicholson, S. 2012. “A User-Centered Theoretical Framework for Meaningful Gamification.” In *GLS 8.0 Conference Proceedings*. Madison, WI, USA: ETC Press.
* O’Donovan, Siobhan, James Gain, and Patrick Marais. 2013. “A Case Study in the Gamification of a University-Level Games Development Course.” In *Proceedings of the South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists Conference, 242–51. SAICSIT ’13*. New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/2513456.2513469.
* Raftopoulos, Marigo. 2014. “Towards Gamification Transparency: A Conceptual Framework for the Development of Responsible Gamified Enterprise Systems.” *Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds* 6 (2): 159–78. doi:10.1386/jgvw.6.2.159_1.











Some sources go on at length about the value of intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivations. According to self-determination theory, the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivations is not the best predictor of performance, since not all extrinsic motivations are the same. Self-determination theory describes a spectrum of extrinsic motivations distinguished by the extent to which they have been internalized.  Highly-internalized extrinsic motivations are almost indistinguishable from intrinsic motivations in terms of workplace performance.  These motivations are classified as autonomous motivations; they are motives that both express and foster an individuals sense of self-determination.  It is the level of self-determination that predicts how much a motivation will positively impact work performance.

Reiss' 16 Motives theory subdivides intrinsic motivations into 16 types, which are supported as being distinct influences on behavior by empirical studies. In this theory, the highly-integrated extrinsic motivations of self-determination theory are considered as intrinsic motivations, since intrinsic motivations are only required to lead to the satiation of desires, and are not required to be inherently pleasurable (Reiss 2004). The latter is a requirement of  self-determination theory, in which intrinsic motivations are definitionally distinguished from highly-integrated extrinsic motivations by being interesting (Gagné and Deci 2005) and/or enjoyable (Ryan and Deci 2000) to an individual.

Irrespective of whether or not intrinsic and highly integrated extrinsic motivations should be conceptually separated as they are in self-determination theory, the theory is still useful. It provides a useful predictor for the performance impact of a motivation: autonomy.  All other things being equal, the more autonomous a motivation, the stronger it is.



Reiss' 16 Motives is useful for the motivation alignment of game design elements and the user.  For example, one of the 16 motives *status*, is defined as “Desire for social standing (including desire for attention)” (Reiss 2004).  Game elements that highlight a user's social standing&mdash;counts of friends; public postings of “Thank You” messages; leaderboards&mdash;will align with a motivation for *status*, and help increase it.  However, those same game elements will align poorly with *curiosity* (“Desire for knowledge”), and so will have little effect on it.

The 16 motives are also useful for bridging motivations back to system goals.  The motivations are not required to be pleasurable because they are instead tied to the satiation of a desire.  *Curiosity* satiates the desire for knowledge; people who are not strongly motivated by *curiosity* have a desire for knowledge that is easily satiated.  People not strongly motivated by *status* have a low desire for social standing.

Summaries of some user motivations are also given in “Playful Design” (Ferrara 2012).

Immersion  
Autonomy
Competence
Catharsis
Accomplishment
Social Image
Social Interaction
Creativity

The motivations from Ferrar (2012) aren't from studying people, but from studying players of games.  It starts with the premise that people are motivated to play games, and explores why.

This is in contrast to the motivations given by Reiss (2004), which aren't in any way connected to game play, but are rather are generalized motivations for all human behavior.

And self-determination theory (Ryan and Deci 2000; Gagné and Deci 2005) is largely focused on work performance, and workplace behaviors.









Game design elements that increase a user's sense and expression of autonomy will increase the user's motivation to use the application.

Gamified applications can align with these motives and goals through a number of design choices.  What behaviors are rewarded with feedback, and what form that feedback takes; what things are tracked as indicators of progress; what challenges must be overcome to advance.

If the main goal of a system is to increase knowledge, then *curiosity* is a motivation that game design elements should be fueling. Appropriate game design elements might give feedback that reinforces behaviors like exploration, or experimentation.  They should not give feedback that reinforces covering the same material over and over, e.g., farming a particular location in a large game space. 

In another example, if creativity is the goal, then a system should reward creativity: “Reward presented repeatedly in a nonsalient fashion for a high degree of divergent thinking acts to increase subsequent creativity on an entirely new task. …In contrast, rewarding a low degree of originality produces a decrease in generalized creativity.” (Eisenberger and Cameron 1996)

Game design elements should also not be detached from the central motivations and goals of the system.  They can become a sort of counter-motivating feedback, as users become lost in the disconnect between the system's goals and the game-design layer.  “Feedback needs to be specific and relevant if it is to motivate…. We already know that goals will not be effective without feedback, and performance information helps people clarify expectancies…” (Siegall 1988).






  1. Motivations are entirely extrinsic? Not a user goal.





## Process

Goals.


----

* Ferrara, John. 2012. *Playful Design: Creating Game Experiences in Everyday Interfaces*. 1st ed. Brooklyn, New York: Rosenfeld Media.

I assume that most readers are working in support of external objectives, most likely driven by business needs or by social causes. Understanding these objectives means getting a handle on your personal investment in the game.
It’s also important to consider why you believe that a game is the best way
to achieve your objective. Recognize that games are better suited to certain objectives, and entirely unsuited to others. Ask yourself where your objective falls on this spectrum, and what specific advantages games provide that cannot be met through other channels.

To Generate Revenue
In these cases, your objective to generate revenue would share space with the client’s objective to achieve a different goal.
 To Encourage Action
To Support Learning
To Persuade





Raftopoulos, Marigo. 2014. “Towards Gamification Transparency: A Conceptual Framework for the Development of Responsible Gamified Enterprise Systems.” Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds 6 (2): 159–78. doi:10.1386/jgvw.6.2.159_1.


Design Process: I propose a seven-step process synthesized from various game development, design thinking and innovation processes (Brown 2009; Fullerton 2008; Mootee 2013; Zimmerman and Salen 2004). The seven steps include: (1) setting project objectives; (2) mapping project motivations, methods and outcomes; (3) mapping stakeholders and user personas; (4) creative problem-solving through participatory design; (5) exploring suitable technology platforms; (6) selecting appropriate gameplay and game mechanics; and (7) prototype, pilot, test and launch the gamified application. Each step includes exercises at key intervals to ‘check-in’ on how the process is tracking with agreed values and ethics principles that are set up at the beginning of the process. It should be noted that this is not necessarily a linear process, and is highly iterative. A more detailed discussion on this process, including the purpose, activ- ity and sample methods for each step is provided in a later section of this article. The design process is illustrated in Figure 3.



The seven steps include: 
(1) setting project objectives; 
(2) mapping project motivations, methods and outcomes; 
(3) mapping stakeholders and user personas; 
(4) creative problem-solving through participatory design; 
(5) exploring suitable technology platforms; 
(6) selecting appropriate gameplay and game mechanics; and 
(7) prototype, pilot, test and launch the gamified application. 


Each step includes exercises at key intervals to ‘check-in’ on how the process is tracking with agreed values and ethics principles that are set up at the beginning of the process. It should be noted that this is not necessarily a linear process, and is highly iterative. A more detailed discussion on this process, including the purpose, activity and sample methods for each step is provided in a later section of this article. The design process is illustrated in Figure 3.



If organizational goals are the center of a gamified system, then the system may be a “technological whip” used by the organization for surveillance, monitoring and performance tracking (Raftopoulos 2014).




----

Nicholson, S. 2012. “A User-Centered Theoretical Framework for Meaningful Gamification.” In GLS 8.0 Conference Proceedings. Madison, WI, USA: ETC Press.


In conclusion, meaningful gamification puts the needs and goals of the users over the needs of the organization. If users have a positive and meaningful game-based experience that is well-connected to the underlying non-game setting, then the organization will benefit in the long term. Meaningful gamification focuses on introducing elements of play instead of elements of scoring. The same activities will not be meaningful to all users, so designers need to provide a variety of game-based activities to appeal to different users or a customizable gamification system where users can create their own activities. The dependence upon external rewards for motivation should be replaced by connections between the non-game activity and needs or goals in the user's life based upon information, which will allow users to have a positive internalized experience. The resulting user-centered meaningful gamification will result in longer-term and deeper engagement between participants, non-game activities, and supporting organizations.



----

Conway, Steven. 2014. “Zombification?: Gamification, Motivation, and the User.” Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds 6 (2): 129–41. doi:10.1386/jgvw.6.2.129_1.


Such constructive alignment (Biggs 1996) of the user’s experience with his or her goals requires a design that begins with the person as opposed to the organization. Gamification must show consideration of the innate psychological needs of its participants and the situation they are embedded within, as Deterding offers vis-à-vis his concept of situated motivational affordances:




Again, by aligning the system design with an understanding of the user’s needs and situation, extrinsically motivated learning is integrated and identified with. Instead of autonomy being undermined, it is supported, and therefore competence may be achieved without subsequent demotivation.


Intrinsic motivation is intimately tied to the locus of control, part of one’s sense of autonomy. As we have discussed, external rewards can cause a shift in an individual’s sense of the locus of control, as moving away from the person towards the source of the reward. Following this, the individual may question the inherent value of the work and his or her attitude towards it. 

An instrumental mentality may, therefore, become exaggerated when the structuring element of the extrinsic reward is offered. 
Once this particular Pandora’s Box is opened, it can never be closed; as even proponent of gamification Gabe Zichermann acknowledges, ‘once you start giving someone a reward, you have to keep her in that reward loop forever’



Intrinsic motivation is intimately tied to the locus of control, part of one’s sense of autonomy.



I ultimately argue towards three conclusions: 
first, that there can be value in applying game design features within non-game contexts, but only when aligned with a constructivist, user-centred design sensitive to the sociocultural situation. 

Second, that the injection of explicit game-like features into areas of social reality traditionally separate from games, without consideration of the situation, can prove hazardous in a number of ways.

Finally, for gamification to fulfil its premise, I argue that it must fundamentally transform the user activity rather than simply adding superpanoptical structures to the old.










